HOMILY II  
On the Beginning of Creation  
“In the beginning God made heaven and earth.” (Genesis 1:1)

“And the earth,” he says, “was invisible and unformed.”

Tell me—why did He bring forth the heaven bright and complete, but display the earth as formless? He did not do this without purpose, nor at random. Rather, so that when you learn His creative power from the more excellent part of creation, you may thereafter have no doubt at all, nor suppose that this occurred because of any weakness of power.

Moreover, He produced it formless for another reason as well. For the earth is our nurse and mother; from it we were made and by it we are nourished. It is also our homeland and our common tomb, for to it we return again. Through it we enjoy countless benefits. Therefore, lest the human race, because of necessity of use, should honor it beyond its worth, He first shows it to you as formless and unshaped, so that you may not attribute the benefits that come from it to the nature of the earth itself, but to Him who brought it from non-being into being.

For this reason he says: “And the earth was invisible and unformed.”

Perhaps, from the very beginning, by following the works with the words themselves, I have stretched your minds toward subtler meanings. Therefore it is fitting to stop the discourse here, exhorting your love to remember what has been said and always to keep these things alive in your memory. And after the sensible table, when you depart from here, set before yourselves also the spiritual table.

Let the man speak of something that was said here; let the woman listen; let the children learn; let the servants also be instructed. Let the house become a church, so that the devil may be driven away, that wicked demon—enemy of our salvation—may flee, and that the grace of the Holy Spirit may rest there, and that all peace and harmony may surround those who dwell within.

For if you remember what has already been said and receive more eagerly what will be sown afterward, then we too shall speak with greater zeal and abundance what is supplied by the grace of God, when we see the seed already planted bearing fruit. For when the farmer sees the seeds sprouting, he surveys the fields with great eagerness and hastens readily to sow still more.

Therefore, in order that you may make us more eager, show careful guardianship of what has already been said, and together with sound doctrine apply great diligence to the care of your life.

“For let your light shine before men,” he says, “that they may see your good works and glorify your Father who is in heaven,” so that life may agree with doctrine, and doctrine may proclaim life.

For faith without works is dead, and works without faith are dead. Even if we possess sound doctrine but neglect our life, the doctrine will profit us nothing. Again, even if we are diligent in life but stumble in doctrine, neither will this bring us any gain. Therefore, this spiritual building must be secured on both sides.

“For everyone who hears these words of Mine and does them,” He says, “will be likened to a wise man.”

See how He wills us not only to hear, but also to act and to demonstrate obedience through deeds. Such a one He called wise. But the one who only listens to words and does not act, He called foolish—and rightly so. For such a person built his house upon sand, and thus could not withstand the assault of the winds, but quickly collapsed.

Such are the careless souls, not firmly established upon the spiritual rock. For the discourse is not now about buildings and houses, but about souls—souls shaken by even a small temptation. By the names of winds, rain, and rivers, He indicated temptations.

For the one who is steadfast, watchful, and sober becomes stronger in this way; and the more affliction intensifies, the more courage increases. But the lazy and careless person, even if struck by a slight breeze of temptation, is immediately shaken and falls—not because of the nature of temptations, but because of the weakness of the will.

Therefore we must be sober and watchful, prepared for all things, so that both in prosperity we may remain composed, and in afflictions that befall us we may remain sober, showing great gratitude and continually offering thanksgiving to the loving God.

If we order our lives in this way, we shall enjoy great favor from above, and thus be able to pass safely through this present life and lay up for ourselves great confidence for the life to come.

May it be granted to us all to attain this, by the grace and love of mankind of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the Father together with the Holy Spirit be glory, power, and honor, now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.
